[Music]
hey there how guys never talk while
shaving but hey do you even need shaving
well lookie here I've got something for
you
yeah that's my time machine and we're
going to explore why we like to get rid
of our hair so much because the answer
is spoiler alert in the evolution I love
the feeling of time travel here we are
back in around 4 million years BCE where
humans have not yet appeared as such
don't raise your eyebrow at me look see
there in the trees
that's a tribe of Australia pith Essenes
believed to be our direct ancestors they
are primates like us but this far in the
past they look nothing like humans
they're short with more prominent
foreheads flat faces and most
importantly for us completely covered
with hair Australia pith Essenes lived
in the trees like many modern primates
do but what distinguish them from
everyone else was that they learned to
stand and walk upright
scientists believe they did that to walk
on branches that were too brittle or
flexible to climb on all fours
whatever the reason it helped them later
on let's move along and see how forward
five hundred thousand years and we're
looking at another tribe of hominins
human-like apes they don't look much
different from the Australia petha
scenes we've just seen only half a
million years ago Yeah right but many of
them have climbed down to the ground
this is the time when the diet of our
ancestors has started changing forests
have given way to expanding savannas and
living off the trees has become harder
define leaves and fruit they had to
cover bigger and bigger flat land areas
so in the end they decided it just
wasn't worth it and found new food
sources on the ground Bush leaves grass
and later even plant eating animals so
now we see the evolution and progress
they're still hairy though but I'll get
there soon
first let's hop another 500,000 years
forward here homonyms have secured their
place on the ground you won't see any
Australia pithy scenes in the trees
anymore
they've all climbed down and found their
new home in the grasslands at this point
in history more game animals have
appeared - and our ancestors have found
a taste - meat scientists aren't sure
why but it seems we've been omnivorous
meaning all eating from the start
anyways the homonyms have started
hunting more and that later led to some
very interesting developments let's have
a look another leap of a half a million
years and finally the upright-walking
primates have lost some of their hair
not all of it
but that's a start why is that well see
for yourself
the Sun is scorching hot the savanna is
open and provides no shade to hide in
from the heat whew just standing here
makes me sweat all over and now imagine
that you have to gather grasses and eggs
hunt eat and basically do everything
else out here and all of it covered with
a thick layer of fur sizzling is the
first word that comes to my mind our
ancestors had to find some way to
regulate their body heat otherwise
they'd just be baked in their own skins
that's why according to the most popular
theory the homonyms started getting rid
of their body hair they needed open skin
to sweat sweating helps cool down your
body by creating small droplets of
liquid on the skin while sweat is
evaporating the skin surface and small
blood vessels will lose heat but if
there's a layer of fur or hair on the
skin the heat gets trapped in it instead
and no amount of sweat will help you
cool down let's jump ahead a bit more
say a million years further and here we
have homonyms that have already lost
their hair so much that they resemble
modern humans a lot they still have
thick hair on their heads and in some
other areas
but most of it has gone from their
chests backs arms and legs their skin is
also darker than that of their ancestors
which is a sign of evolution -
scientists are pretty sure that the
first homonyms to lose their hair had
their exposed skin pink and tender whoo
as sunburns they must have gotten back
then anyway sunburns were exactly the
reason why their skin got darker with
time at first it was just the suntan but
eventually it became a necessity and in
the end an evolutionary feature ok so
exposed skin makes sweating effective
but how did it help us in the long run
other mammals including primates did not
lose their hair and fur so hominids must
have had some pretty good reasons and
they did just look that way it's the
best example you could ask for see that
male running he's following his game a
deer
let's run after him and watch whoo man I
can't do it anymore
I say let him rot in fact he'll be
running for a long time and we probably
wouldn't have kept pace with him anyway
and this is the main reason why human
ancestors needed to shed their hair as
much as possible now they can run very
long distances without overheating and
getting a heatstroke sweating helps them
keep their stride for a long time and
they're the only bipedal hunters who can
follow their prey for hours on end until
it falls from exhaustion
leaving itself to the mercy of its
stalker upright walking doesn't help
gain speed but it certainly adds to the
endurance and stamina but still there's
something that doesn't add up for
example why did hominids lose their hair
so early I mean they had to keep warm at
night somehow but archaeological
evidence says they started building
fires only 500,000 years BCE let's check
them out see these guys have begun using
fire for cooking meat and warming
themselves but if we go back nope no
fires here scientists are not exactly
sure but one version has it that they
could be huddling together at night
warming each other with their bodies
after all they were highly social
creatures just like we are or in this
case even more than us and one more
thing that this general hair-loss
doesn't seem to explain is why humans
still have so much hair on their heads
but not say on their palms or soles of
their feet
well palms are quite easily explained
just like our ancestors the primates we
need the skin on these parts to be bare
for better grip ever tried grabbing a
metal bar with your hands in woollen or
fur gloves good luck with that
hares would slip and you would simply
drop the bar however hard you may try
the tiny little grooves on the skin of
your palms and fingers though help you
grab things more firmly they can also
identify you to the police but that's
another story same goes for the soles of
your feet although these are a bit more
archaic than palms in fact we might just
as well start growing hair on our souls
because originally we got rid of it for
the same reason grip remember our
distant ancestors used to climb trees
like monkeys
so they used both their hands and feet
for that they had longer toes though and
overall more flexible feet today even
foot grabbing a pen that's fallen on the
floor is not an easy task our heads are
a different story altogether
one of the theory says that we've
retained thick hair on our heads because
of our upright position when we stand
the most exposed to the Sun is exactly
the head and the layer of hair helps
protect the skin and brain from its heat
that doesn't explain the hair in other
areas but at least it's something
and finally the most important question
of all and to answer it we'll need to
return to our own time
here we go okay look out the window see
that guy over there he's got thick black
hair all over his body and the next one
to him
he's almost hairless why is that so and
the answer is genetics
pure and simple some humans have kept
more genetic material from their
ancestors than the others and you can
probably say they evolved less according
to one version we're now moving to a
time when men and women will be mostly
similar in size and looks while
Australia pithos in males could grow
about 50% larger than females in Homo
sapiens that's you this difference is
about 15% and soon it might disappear
altogether but evolution is not a rapid
thing so there are still bigger and
hairier humans being born all the time
and there's even a genetic anomaly
that's called hypertrichosis which is
believed to be a hello to us from the
distant past when humans were still
hairy all over well I hope that explains
it yeah it turns out that evolution was
a big hairy deal hey if you learn
something new today
then give the video a like and share
with a friend and here are some other
videos I think you'll enjoy just click
to the left or right and remember stay
on the bright side of life